Well, dear brothers and sisters,
it is my very great pleasure
to welcome you all
to this graduation program
of the 142nd class
of the Watchtower Bible School
of Gilead.
We have satellite locations
tied in
across the United States
branch territory,
as well as our dear brothers
in Canada and, of course, in time,
we expect that this will also be shown
to our brothers
via JW Broadcasting.
So, what a large audience
will benefit
from our program today!
Well, you students
are truly loved.
I checked with the Bethel Office
just yesterday
and found out
that guests have come
from 40 different countries
to be a part
of this graduation program.
Isn’t that wonderful?
So we’re very much looking forward
to this spiritual feast
that’s about to take place.
So now, if you’re able,
let’s stand
and sing
song number 54,
“This Is the Way,” and then
following the song,
Brother Robert Butler,
a helper
to the Publishing Committee
of the Governing Body,
will offer our opening prayer,
song 54.
Our marvelous God, Jehovah,
has the greatest
and most far-reaching vision.
At Job 28:24,
we read: “For he looks
to the ends of the earth,
and he sees everything
under the heavens.”
Well, recognizing
Jehovah’s almighty power
and his perfect penetrating vision,
it’s not surprising
that the psalmist
prayed to Jehovah
and expressed this
at Psalm 119:18.
Now, notice this very beautiful
and heartfelt request
that the psalmist made.
He said: “Open my eyes
“so that I may see clearly
the wonderful things
from your law.”
Well now, Jehovah
has truly fulfilled
this prayerful request.
In our day,
even though
2 Corinthians 4:4
tells us that Satan the Devil
“has blinded
the minds of the unbelievers,”
Jehovah is opening up
the spiritual eyes
of honesthearted ones
so that they
can see the truth
that’s coming
from his Word.
And it is truly amazing
to see how honesthearted ones
around this earth
are receiving
spiritual sight from God.
Just take
this one experience.
In May 2015,
a Lutheran priest visited
the Finland branch office
with a pioneer couple.
At Bethel,
she was deeply impressed
with the warm,
loving atmosphere that she saw.
After a month, she attended
the “Imitate Jesus!”
Convention from Friday to Sunday.
Her workmates at the church
asked her to take good notes
of the program
and to share them
—which she did.
In December 2015,
she visited the bishop
and resigned from her office
after 27 years
of service
as an active priest.
The bishop started to cry
when she closed the door.
After resigning,
she sent out this message:
“I have just resigned
from the church.
“Now it is time
for a new life
under Jehovah’s wise protection.”
In January of 2016,
she started serving
as an unbaptized publisher,
and last year
at the regional convention,
she was baptized.
She is now serving
as an auxiliary pioneer
on a continuous basis,
and she says that she wants
to have a share in public witnessing
with carts
close to the church
where she served
for decades.
Well now,
isn’t this interesting though?
This is the last comment
this dear sister made.
She said,
“As a young girl,
“I made a promise
to serve God,
“but it wasn’t until now
“that I actually realized
how God
wanted to be served.”
Aren’t we glad
to welcome this sister
into our worldwide brotherhood?
But going back
to that Scriptural thought
in Psalm 119:18,
this is not simply the prayer
of honesthearted ones
who are in the world.
Really, brothers,
this is our prayer.
You see,
we all want Jehovah
to open up our eyes
and help us
to see his Word clearly.
Now, why is that
so necessary for all of us?
Well, let’s just take
one simple example from the Scriptures
of the faithful man Samuel.
Now, Samuel
was obviously a very spiritual man;
he was a person
who was used
throughout his life
in Jehovah’s service.
But if you look
at this account in 1 Samuel
chapter 16,
you’ll remember that here
Jehovah was sending
Samuel to anoint
one of the sons of Jesse
to become king.
Now, if you look at verse 7,
look at what Jehovah
says to Samuel:
“Do not pay attention
“to his appearance
“and how tall he is,
“for I have rejected him.
“For the way man sees
“is not the way God sees,
“because mere man sees
what appears to the eyes,
but Jehovah sees
into the heart.”
Well now,
do you see the point?
Do you see why we need
to beg Jehovah to open our eyes
and help us
to see clearly his Word?
You see,
our imperfection
affects our vision,
doesn’t it?
Our culture,
the way we were raised,
our fleshly inclinations
can all distort our vision.
We so much need Jehovah God
to open our eyes and help us
so that we can see matters clearly.
Well, for the past 74 years,
Gilead School has been a wonderful tool
to help fine spiritual men and women
to focus and sharpen
their spiritual vision.
Now, during your five and a half months
of schooling,
you’ve had the pleasure
to study God’s Word.
Now, this has not been
just a dry academic exercise.
But really, what you’ve done
is you’ve focused a light
upon God’s Word, the Bible.
Now, we’re not talking
about a little flashlight;
we’re talking about a floodlight.
And what has happened
as a result?
Well, Jehovah has helped
you to see yourself;
he’s helped you
to see the Scriptures;
to see your brothers;
he’s helped you
to see your assignments
much more clearly
through the enlightening influence
of his precious Word, the Bible.
Well, as a result of all of that,
you are no longer
the people you were
when you arrived at Gilead.
You have changed.
But now,
what are you going to do
with this wonderful gift
that you have been given
by Jehovah,
this expanded spiritual vision
which has been extended to you?
Well, when you think about Gilead,
this school is something
that is very close
to our hearts
as Jehovah’s people.
It’s tied up
with our spiritual parents,
our spiritual grandparents,
with the foundation
of the work
in so many countries
of this earth.
There is
a wonderful spiritual legacy
associated with Gilead.
Well, what do you
want to do?
You want to become
a part of that legacy.
You want to take the gift
that you have been given
by Jehovah and use it
to strengthen
and stabilize
the congregations, the fields,
the branch offices
where you are going to serve.
And what a group
you’re going to join!
Let me just give you
some statistics.
At the present time,
Gilead graduates are serving
in many fields of service.
For example,
915 are serving as Bethelites,
880 serve
as field missionaries,
496 serve
as circuit overseers
or wives
of circuit overseers,
244 serve
as members of Branch
or Country Committees,
4 serve as Governing Body helpers,
and 2 are members
of the Governing Body.
Well, when you think
of all of these individuals
who are working hard to advance
Kingdom interests around the world,
how much we want to praise
our magnificent,
our wonderful God, Jehovah,
for what he’s done
by means of the Gilead School
and by means of his organization
to open our eyes
and help us
to see his Word clearly.
Don’t you agree, brothers?
Well, I’m sure that all of us
are looking forward to hearing
where our students
are going to be going.
But before we reach
that part in our program,
it’s appropriate
that we hear a number of talks
that are going to give
words of counsel,
words of encouragement,
even words of comfort
that will build up
not only the students
but all of us
who will hear this program.
First of all, we’re privileged to hear
from a member of the Governing Body
Brother Stephen Lett.
He is going to speak to us
this morning on the theme
“Imitate Jehovah’s Use of Memory,”
Brother Lett.
As you know,
Ephesians 5:1
tells us
to “become imitators of God,
as beloved children.”
And if we think about it,
absolutely everything
we can learn about Jehovah
is worthy of imitation,
and that includes
his use of memory,
as we will discuss
during this talk.
But now first, we ask,
What do we mean by memory?
Well, one encyclopedia says this:
“Memory is the faculty
of the mind
“by which information
is encoded,
stored, and retrieved.”
But, unfortunately,
most of us struggle
with remembering
things we want to remember
and not remembering
things we would like to forget.
We remember
what we want to forget;
we don’t remember
what we want to remember.
It’s a struggle, isn’t it?
But if you think about it,
to illustrate this:
I can’t remember
where I left my glasses.
Where did I
leave my glasses?
But I do remember
in detail
how you offended me
20 years ago.
By the way, when someone
comes up to me at a convention
or an assembly and says:
“Do you remember my name?”
I say: “Well, Brother,
“I remember
your first name,
“but I don’t remember
your last name.
Your first name
is Brother, right?”
Well, feel free to use
that little trick if you want to.
But even though it is
a real challenge for us
as imperfect humans
with imperfect memories
to imitate Jehovah’s perfect use
of his perfect memory,
we should work hard
to try to do so.
In fact,
we’re going to discuss four ways
in which Jehovah
uses his memory
that we would do well
to imitate.
Now the first one,
let’s identify what it is.
And you dear Gilead students,
if you really work
in these four areas,
it will help you in your assignments.
But now,
go to Hebrews chapter 6, please,
and let’s read
verse number 10.
It says:
“For God is not unrighteous
“so as to forget your work
“and the love you showed
for his name by ministering
and continuing to minister
to the holy ones.”
So you notice according to this scripture,
Jehovah does not forget.
He always remembers
our love for him
and our hard work
in behalf of Kingdom interests.
In fact,
the Insight book said:
‘An individual’s record
of fine works
‘are like riches deposited
with the Creator in heaven.’
So if you think about it,
every time that you
go out in the ministry,
attend a meeting,
help build a Kingdom Hall,
unselfishly help
someone in need,
it’s like you make a deposit
in that great heavenly bank
—Jehovah’s memory.
And he never forgets it.
And he shows
his appreciation.
How so?
Well, he remembers
to hear our prayers.
He remembers
to give us holy spirit.
to rescue us
from anything
that could harm us spiritually.
But now the question,
How we can imitate
this first example
of Jehovah’s use of memory?
Well, as Jehovah
doesn’t forget our love for him
—our hard work—
we don’t want to forget
Jehovah’s love for us
and his hard work
in our behalf.
He works so tirelessly,
you could say,
in our behalf, doesn’t he?
As we said,
remembering our prayers,
giving us holy spirit,
helping us.
We don’t want
to forget that; especially,
we want to remember all the times
Jehovah has helped us in the past.
And we know he’s not going
to abandon us now.
He’s going to help us now.
We want to be like David.
He said: “Jehovah,
who rescued me
“from the claws
of the lion and the bear,
“he is the one
who will rescue me
from the hand
of this Philistine.”
He remembered how Jehovah
had always helped him.
He knew Jehovah
would help him now.
An extended application:
We don’t want to take for granted
the hard work and the love
that others
are showing for Jehovah.
And we want to,
from time to time, commend them
and support them
—the hardworking elders,
hardworking ministerial servants
and pioneers,
parents trying to raise
their children properly,
children trying to keep
their integrity to Jehovah.
See, take note of that,
remember that,
commend and support.
But now let’s get
a second way
that Jehovah
uses his memory.
Let’s go to Luke chapter 20,
and verse 38.
It says: “He is a God,
“not of the dead,
“but of the living,
for they are all
living to him.”
Now what do we learn?
Well, Jehovah
completely remembers
faithful ones
who have died.
They’re living in his memory,
and appropriately,
these ones are referred to
as being in the memorial tombs
because Jehovah’s memory
is involved.
Now, how can we
imitate this example
of Jehovah’s use
of memory?
Well, we don’t want
to forget these faithful ones
who have died either.
And we have a lot
of life stories, for example,
in our publications to help us remember
them and their good qualities.
They’re good examples
that we can keep learning from
—for example, former members
of the Governing Body,
such as Brother Klein;
other members
of the anointed,
or ones of the anointed
—Sister Gertrud Pötzinger,
Georg Lindal,
Bennett Brickell;
ones that had the earthy hope,
life stories about them
—Brothers George Couch,
Max Larson,
Robert Wallen.
And, of course, the Bible, as you know,
contains numerous examples, doesn’t it,
of ones who have died
that we don’t want to forget?
We want to keep reading about them,
meditating on their examples
and learning from them.
Well, let’s get a third way, now,
that Jehovah uses his memory.
Let’s go to Joshua chapter 21,
and we’ll read verse 45,
Joshua 21:45:
“Not a promise failed
“out of all the good promises
that Jehovah had made
“to the house of Israel;
all of them came true.”
Now, this scripture
and several others show
that Jehovah
never forgets his promises.
He remembers them,
and he fulfills all of his promises,
doesn’t he?
In contrast,
speaking of politicians,
one writer made a comment:
“They promise the moon,
“but once they get into office,
they do well to deliver
a moonbeam.”
Well, others have what has been labeled
as a selective memory,
or selective amnesia,
it’s been labeled,
regarding promises they’ve made,
but not Jehovah.
And, of course, as Jehovah’s children,
we want to imitate him;
remember our promises.
What promise especially?
Our dedication promise.
In our dedication vow,
we promised to do
Jehovah’s will
unreservedly.
We promised that we
would put Jehovah’s will
ahead of our own will.
That’s what we promised.
And what is the duration
of this promise,
this most important promise
we ever made?
Well, forever.
What if we die; we’re resurrected?
Well, are you
going to have to get rebaptized
when you are resurrected
or rededicate your life to Jehovah?
No.
Your dedication
and baptism
endure even death
and resurrection.
So he expects us
to fulfill that promise
we have made.
Now, those of us
who are married,
he expects us
to fulfill our marriage vows.
Maybe we’ve made
other promises to Jehovah.
For example,
here at Gilead School,
you may have made promises
to Jehovah.
Well, he expects us
to remember
and fulfill
those promises.
But now, let’s get one more way
—a fourth way—Jehovah uses his memory.
Let’s go
to Isaiah 43, please,
and this scripture
will help us identify it,
Isaiah 43:25,
Jehovah says:
“I, I am the One
“who is blotting out
your transgressions
“for my own sake,
“and I will not remember
your sins.”
Now, very interestingly,
when Jehovah forgives a sin,
he refuses to remember
—to recall it—
to ever hold that sin
against the person.
He chooses
not to remember that sin.
The Watchtower some years ago
said that Jehovah
“will never call to mind
our forgiven sins.”
Now that’s amazing
use of memory, isn’t it?
Truly amazing.
Why does Jehovah choose,
you could say,
to delete our forgiven sins?
Well, is it because he wants
to make more room in his memory?
No.
Jehovah has unlimited memory, doesn’t he?
He calls all of the trillions
of stars by name.
I have a hard time calling by name
the some 20 commenters
at the Monday night
Bethel family Watchtower Study.
Jehovah remembers
in full detail
the billions
who are
in the memorial tombs.
So memory capacity
is not the problem, is it?
Jehovah forgives and forgets
because of his love and mercy.
But now, how can we
imitate Jehovah here?
Well, we want
to work hard
to freely forgive
as Jehovah does,
but then we want to work hard
to try to delete that forgiven sin
from our memories.
How do you delete something
from your memory?
Well, you refuse
to replay it, review it.
In contrast, if you want
to remember something,
you do review it,
don’t you?
If you want to remember
someone’s name,
you keep repeating that
to yourself
—you want to remember
a scripture,
a word in a language
you’re trying to learn.
On the other hand, if you don’t want
to remember something,
you refuse to replay it
—you dismiss that thought
like an immoral thought
as an example.
The same way
with forgiven sins,
we refuse to replay them.
We do our best,
as 2 Corinthians 10:5 says,
to bring
“every thought into captivity.”
“Make it obedient to the Christ.”
Well, we have four ways
Jehovah uses his memory there
that we’ve now discussed.
Did you get them?
(1) He remembers
our love for him and our hard work
in behalf of Kingdom interests.
We want to remember his love
and hard work on our behalf,
and by extension,
the love and hard work of others.
(2) He never forgets
faithful ones who have died.
Well, we don’t want
to forget them either.
By means of the Bible,
by means of life stories,
we can remember these ones
and learn from them.
(3) He always remembers
his promises and fulfills them.
We want to do the same.
(4) He chooses not to remember,
completely forgets,
our forgiven sins.
We want to work hard
to do the same thing.
May we remember to forget.
You have to think about that.
Well, likely you can think of other aspects
of Jehovah’s use of memory
that would be
worthy of imitation.
In fact, I’m going
to give you students
that as a homework assignment.
Come up with some other examples
of how Jehovah uses his memory
that we can imitate.
Now, I’ll get you started.
Psalm 103:14
says Jehovah remembers
that “we are dust.”
Now, how can we imitate
that aspect of Jehovah’s memory?
Now, you’re used
to homework assignments.
You’ve had them for five months.
Now you have another assignment.
But may Jehovah bless
each of you dear ones
as you strive,
with the help of holy spirit,
to imitate Jehovah’s use
of memory.
Well, we sincerely thank you,
Brother Lett,
for that fine talk,
and you can be certain
that we will remember it.
Well next, we’re privileged to hear
from Brother Saki Marais,
a helper to the Writing Committee
of the Governing Body.
Brother Marais is going to speak
to us on the subject
“With the Measure
That You Measure Out.”
We know that you as students
truly appreciated the privilege
to go through Gilead,
to learn so many things.
And during this time,
you have been given
many things,
many gifts, as it were.
And we know the scripture says
‘every good
‘and perfect gift
comes from Jehovah.’
But now,
how should we view this gift
that you have received?
The Bible helps us
in a very interesting way
in Ephesians chapter 4,
Ephesians chapter 4,
and it says here in verse 7:
“Now undeserved kindness
“was given to each one of us
“according to how the Christ
measured out the free gift.”
So it is a free gift.
We didn’t earn it.
We didn’t deserve it.
But nevertheless,
it came from the Christ,
and he measured it out to us
—very kindly measured it out to us.
Now, what is the purpose
of this gift?
Why did we get this gift?
He goes on to explain here
in chapter 4,
verse 8,
that he turns these individuals
who received these gifts
into gifts
—they become gifts of men.
And now, we look at verse 10.
What is the purpose?
It’s “so that he might give
fullness to all things.”
Now, Christ gives out this gift
in many different ways,
many different manifestations
of his gift.
For instance,
look at verse 11.
Some are apostles,
prophets, evangelizers,
shepherds, and teachers.
The purpose?
That each of these gifts
will share what they have
in order to help
every member
of the congregation.
If you look here
in verses 12 and 13,
we read from the last part of verse 12:
“To build up
the body of the Christ,
“until we all attain
“to the oneness of the faith
“and of the accurate knowledge
of the Son of God,
“to being a full-grown man,
“attaining the measure of stature
that belongs
to the fullness of the Christ.”
This is wonderful, isn’t it?
Just to think
that Christ Jesus
has given you
this wonderful gift,
this ability
to build up
the rest of the congregation
—that is your obligation
and your responsibility.
At 1 Peter 4:10,
an additional aspect
about this gift is given to us.
Let us read at 1 Peter 4:10,
it says:
“To the extent that each one
“has received a gift,
“use it in ministering
to one another
“as fine stewards
of God’s undeserved kindness
that is expressed
in various ways.”
So this is our opportunity
to use this gift
as a distributor,
an administrator,
of God’s undeserved kindness.
But this gift
is very different
from a normal gift
that we would receive.
Why would this gift
be different?
Normally, when you get a gift,
what do you do?
You look at this gift and you think:
‘I wonder what’s in it.
‘I wonder
if I’m going to like it.
I wonder
how I will use it.’
That’s normally the case,
but with this gift that we receive,
we receive the gift,
and we
just simply give it on
without opening the gift.
This is our obligation
with this gift that we’ve received.
Christ Jesus helps us
to understand
how to administer
this gift.
And we turn to Luke chapter 6,
verses 32-37,
Luke chapter 6,
starting with verse 32:
“If you love those loving you,
“of what credit is it to you?
“For even the sinners
love those loving them.
“And if you do good
to those doing good to you,
“of what credit is it to you?
“Even the sinners do the same.
“Also, if you lend to those
“from whom
you expect repayment,
“of what credit is it to you?
“Even sinners lend to sinners
“so that they
may get back as much.
“On the contrary,
“continue to love
“your enemies
“and to do good and to lend
“without hoping
for anything back;
“and your reward will be great,
“and you will be
“sons of the Most High,
“for he is kind
“toward the unthankful
and wicked.
“Continue being merciful,
“just as your Father is merciful.
“Moreover, stop judging,
“and you will
by no means be judged;
“and stop condemning,
“and you will by no means
be condemned.
“Keep on forgiving,
and you will be forgiven.”
So we cannot be judges
of those to whom
we give the gift.
We are not judges;
we are not condemning people.
Our whole purpose
of administering this gift
that we’ve received
is to do so without any prejudice.
We do not judge
the worthiness of the recipient.
We only take on our responsibility,
our dignity that we
have been given by Jehovah
—that of passing on the gift.
The second part,
apart
from being completely unprejudiced,
the second part is that we
must give freely and generously.
Now, we get to verse 37,
excuse me, verse 38:
“Practice giving,
“and people will give to you.
“They will pour
into your laps a fine measure,
“pressed down,
shaken together,
“and overflowing.
“For with the measure
“that you are measuring out,
“they will measure out
to you in return.”
So Jehovah God
is extremely generous.
He makes the sun shine
and the rain
come upon righteous
and the unrighteous.
And as Paul says:
“He himself
“gives . . . life
and breath and all things”
to everyone.
And Jehovah is very interested
in how we administer
the gifts given into our hands.
That’s why it says
‘with the measure
you measure out.’
He is very interested
to see whether we
do so very carefully.
This is like the example
of parents
that train their children
to make a contribution
at the Kingdom Hall.
They give the child
a little bit of money and they
tell him to go put it
in the contribution box.
Now, they expect the child to go
and put it in the contribution box,
right, not to keep it for himself?
They also don’t expect the child
to collect all the contributions
over a long period of time
and then go make some big donation.
No, the parents
are actually giving the contribution,
and they expect the child
to do it the way they tell him.
Take it; go and put it
in the contribution box now.
And so it is with Jehovah.
He is giving us this gift,
but we need to pass it on.
It is not for us to look
and to hold on to this gift.
So here’s the lesson:
Be careful,
very careful,
that you do not control
the gift that Jehovah
gives you too closely.
Remember,
the gift has to be passed on;
otherwise,
we will lose Jehovah’s favor.
We cannot bury the talent
in the ground, as it were.
We receive it; we must spend it.
As much as we treasure it,
we cannot hold on to it.
And so now we come
to the key statement here:
“With the measure . . .
you are measuring out,”
makes us sons
of the Most High.
We cannot be more generous
than Jehovah.
But does your generosity
match the generosity
of Jehovah in your case?
Generosity has to become
a habit for us,
a way of life.
And here is
another very important aspect:
Jehovah is giving
not just anything;
he gives the very best.
He doesn’t hold back;
he gives us the very best.
Let us read
these most profound words
at Romans chapter 8,
and in verse 32:
“Since he did not even spare
his own Son
“but handed him over
for us all,
“will he not also,
along with him,
“kindly give us
all other things?”
So Jehovah gives it all.
The principle for us:
With the measure we measure out,
it will be measured out to us.
This is an eternal truth.
We can count on it.
You’ve been given much;
don’t hold back.
Give it all.
Give your best.
The benefit
is not in using the gift;
the benefit
is in giving the gift.
For with the measure
you measure out,
it will be measured out to you.
And we thank you very much,
Brother Marais,
for the beautiful gift
that you gave us.
Now we’re looking forward
to hearing
from another helper to the Writing Committee,
Brother Robert Ciranko.
He’s going to speak
to us today on the theme
“Is It All About You?”
It is a rare privilege
to be invited to attend
the Watchtower Bible School
of Gilead.
And in its 74-year history,
only about 9,000 students
have graduated from this school.
Well, now at it’s current pace
of two classes a year,
how long do you think it would take
for all 67,000 special full-time servants
in the world to be able
to attend Gilead?
Over 600 years.
So we rejoice with you students
for having been able to enjoy
this excellent privilege.
But now,
we have to be cautious
when we think
about the word “privilege.”
One dictionary says
it is “a right
that is given to some people
and not to others.”
So if not careful,
we could wrongly assume that receiving this
or certain ther privileges
in Jehovah’s organization
somehow elevates
us above the rest
of Jehovah’s faithful servants.
And then by thinking that,
we could start
to believe that it
is all about us.
But is it?
The same dictionary says
that “privilege” can also mean
“a special opportunity
to do something,”
and that is what
we need to focus on
whenever we receive
a privilege in God’s service
—the opportunity
it gives us to serve.
There was an incident with Jesus’ apostles
that nicely illustrates this.
If you open your Bibles, please,
to Matthew the 19th chapter,
Matthew chapter 19,
and keep your Bibles open there.
It was the year 33
of our Common Era,
just days before Jesus’ life
and ministry
would come
to an abrupt end.
He and his disciples were traveling
to Jerusalem for the Passover.
And a rich young ruler
runs up to Jesus
and asks what he has to do
to gain everlasting life,
and Jesus explained.
But the wealthy man
was dismayed when he found out
that he would have to sell his belongings,
give to the poor,
and follow Christ.
Well, taking this all in,
one of Jesus’ apostles
pointed out that they
had given up
their former vocations
to follow Christ.
This is Matthew 19:27:
“Then Peter said
in reply: ‘Look!
“‘We have left all things
and followed you;
what, then,
will there be for us?’”
In modern parlance,
Peter was asking,
“What’s in it for us?”
Well, Jesus doesn’t leave them wondering
because in verse 28,
he promises them that when he
gets into his Kingdom,
they eventually will sit
on thrones with him.
And you can be sure that
that prospect really stuck in their minds,
and they must have dwelled on it
as they continued on their journey
to Jerusalem.
But a short time later,
look at what happens
at Matthew 20:20:
“Then the mother of the sons of Zebedee
approached him with her sons,
“doing obeisance and asking
for something from him.
“He said to her:
‘What do you want?’
“She replied to him:
“‘Give the word that these two sons
of mine may sit down,
one at your right hand and one at your left,
in your Kingdom.’”
Well, James and John
probably put their mother up to that,
and how clever they
must have thought they were
that they got to Jesus with their request
before Peter or the others did!
And what was
the reaction of the rest?
Look at verse 24:
“When the ten others heard about it,
they became indignant
at the two brothers.”
They were upset with James and John
for trying to reserve for themselves
the best thrones in the Kingdom,
and they probably also wished
they had thought of the idea first.
Well, even before this,
we know the apostles had argued
among themselves
as to which one was the greatest.
So do you see
what their problem was?
It was all about them.
These 12 men already enjoyed
the special privilege
of having been chosen
to be an apostle of Christ;
they were told
of a future amazing privilege
to sit on thrones
in the heavenly Kingdom;
and now they’re trying to secure
something even more for themselves.
And what must have made this
especially disheartening to Jesus
is what occurred
just moments before.
Look at verse 17:
“While going up to Jerusalem,
Jesus took the 12 disciples
“aside privately and said
to them on the road: ‘Look!
“‘We are going up to Jerusalem,
and the Son of man
“‘will be handed over
to the chief priests and the scribes.
“‘They will condemn him to death
“‘and hand him over to men
of the nations to be mocked
and scourged
and executed on a stake.’”
With all that Jesus
had on his mind
—preparing himself mentally
and emotionally for what lay ahead—
the last thing
he should have been troubled with
was the apostles
posturing themselves
for some sort of greatness.
But Jesus
patiently took them aside
to impress upon them
the right attitude.
Verse 25:
“But Jesus called them
to him and said:
“‘You know that the rulers
of the nations lord it over them
“‘and the great men
wield authority over them.
“‘This must not be
the way among you;
“‘but whoever
wants to become great
“‘among you
must be your minister,
“‘and whoever
wants to be first
“‘among you
must be your slave.
“‘Just as the Son of man came,
“‘not to be ministered to,
“‘but to minister
and to give his life as a ransom
in exchange for many.’”
Yes, when Jesus came to earth,
it was to minister
—it was to serve others.
He was not aspiring
to any positions
of honor or prestige,
and Jesus’ disciples
needed that same disposition.
They needed to appreciate
that the greatest person in the Kingdom
must be the one
who humbly serves others.
You see, Jehovah bestows
privileges on us,
not to give us
some sense of entitlement,
but to create
opportunities for us
to be more useful
in our service to God.
To show that Jesus
really meant what he said,
notice what happened next.
And by now, they are
within a day’s journey of Jerusalem.
Verse 29:
“As they were going out of Jericho,
a large crowd followed him.
“And look! two blind men
sitting beside the road
“heard that Jesus
was passing by and cried out:
“‘Lord, have mercy on us,
Son of David!’
“But the crowd rebuked them,
“telling them to keep silent;
“yet they cried all the louder,
saying:
“‘Lord, have mercy on us,
Son of David!’
“So Jesus stopped,
called them, and said:
“‘What do you want
me to do for you?’
“They said to him:
‘Lord, let our eyes be opened.’
“Moved with pity,
Jesus touched their eyes,
“and immediately
they recovered their sight,
and they followed him.”
Imagine again how much
was weighing on Jesus’ heart
at that very moment.
You see, he knew
he was about to enter
the final week
of his earthly life
—that intense suffering
and a cruel death awaited him
and that his integrity
to God was going
to be put on the line.
And yet he does not ignore
the insistent cries
of these desperate men.
Did you notice
in verse 32 what Jesus
asked the two blind men?
He said: “What do you
want me
to do for you?”
Now, what might we
be tempted to say
if we see someone
approaching us
and wanting to ask a favor,
or our help, for something?
Well, if we suspect that their request
will be too distasteful
or time-consuming to fulfill,
we might want to reserve for ourselves
the opportunity to delegate
the task to someone else.
So we might just say,
“What do you want?”
But not Jesus.
And on ever so many occasions,
he was deeply moved
to serve the needs of others
because it was never all about him.
What a good lesson
for us always to imitate.
You see, we can approach life
expecting to be
a person of privilege
or, like Christ, we can use
the opportunities we are given
to serve
in whatever capacity
we are allowed to do
in Jehovah’s organization.
And for you dear members
of the 142nd class of Gilead,
we believe that you
were already manifesting
that Christlike spirit
in your assignment,
and that’s why you were chosen to attend
this 142nd class of Gilead.
Never lose that spirit.
Now soon, you’re going to go off
with diploma in hand, aren’t you,
maybe to take on
even more responsibility
than you had before?
And Jehovah has reserved
a place for you
to serve him
in his organization.
We are confident
that you will remember
that it has not been
all about you.
Rather, it has been about how you
will use the fine education
you have received now
at Gilead as an opportunity
to continually
and humbly serve others,
and for that,
Jehovah will richly bless you.
We thank you very much,
Brother Ciranko,
for those very heartwarming
and very meaningful thoughts.
Well, now we’re going to begin
to hear some comments
and thoughts from the instructors
of the Gilead School.
First, we’re going to hear
from Brother William Samuelson.
He’s going to speak to us
on the subject
“Perfected Into One.”
Some years ago,
back in the 1700’s,
Thomas Paine,
an American writer, said:
“It’s not in numbers
“but in unity
that great strength lies.”
Well, that reminded me
of a medical emergency
that arose
at a district convention
some years ago.
A brother leaving the stadium
got to the sidewalk and fell
to the ground,
or to the sidewalk,
apparently with a heart attack
or possibly a stroke.
Two ambulances
eventually arrived,
and the two drivers
got into a heated argument
over who had the authority,
or jurisdiction,
to transport our brother
to the nearest emergency ward.
Well, what was it that kept
these two drivers
from being effective
at their job?
It was a lack of unity.
So I was thinking,
‘How can you
‘promote unity
in your job,
in your assignment,
that you’ll be going to?’
Well, there are
any number of ways.
And the list that I’m going to give you,
is just three,
and it is
by no means exhaustive
—good communication;
avoid promoting
a personal agenda;
and if given oversight,
work within the boundaries
of the assignment
and work hard
to be skilled at it.
Good communication.
At the time of the emergency
that I just mentioned,
an unauthorized person
called 911.
Now, that lack of communication
—the unauthorized person
really should have communicated
with the attendants
already on duty
and assigned
to that particular job.
There were EMTs there,
but he saw what he thought
was a serious situation
and called 911.
Now, that resulted in 911
sending the second ambulance.
We’ll talk about that
a little later.
I got to thinking
about a Bible account
—a huge project
that failed because of lack
of communication.
Now, you probably can think
of any number,
and the one I’m going to talk about
we usually think of in a negative way.
But turn
to Genesis chapter 11,
and we’re going to look
at verses 6 through 8 in particular,
and we won’t read all of it,
but just a few little excerpts from it.
In verse 5: “Jehovah
went down to see the city
and the tower,”
the city and Tower of Babel.
They had a project.
“Jehovah then said: ‘Look!
They are one people,’”
they’re united,
“‘with one language, and this
is what they have started to do.
“‘Now there is nothing
that they may have in mind to do
that will be impossible
for them.’”
Because they
had communication,
they were able
to understand each other.
So Jehovah confused
their languages.
But now,
notice in verse 8,
he ‘scattered them
over the entire face of the earth,
and they gradually left off
building the tower.’
Because they couldn’t communicate,
the project failed.
Well, when we examine
our own situation,
the Scriptures tell us—
Paul wrote to the Philippians:
“Look out
“not only
for your own interests,
but also for the interests
of others.”
How will you know
what is in the best interests
of others
if you don’t communicate
with them?
if you don’t talk to them?
if you don’t find out
what their preferences are?
their thinking? their abilities?
And once you find out
what these are,
then you act in harmony
with that and you look
for their interests
rather than your own.
The second point:
Avoid promoting
a personal agenda.
Personal agenda
was defined this way
in one publication:
“An ambitious scheme
or plan of action
“designed to make things
work out for your benefit
“or your convenience
or so that you
can gain control.”
Control seems to sometimes be
a dominant thing.
Well, in our initial illustration,
or example, our two drivers,
both had a personal agenda.
The first ambulance
had been radioed for
and was on-site
because it had been employed
by the convention.
It was there
for just such an emergency,
and obviously that driver
felt that he had jurisdiction.
But you remember
our unauthorized brother
called 911.
Now, 911 dispatched
an ambulance,
and our brother
had collapsed on the sidewalk.
So he felt because it
wasn’t inside the stadium,
it was on the sidewalk,
and because he
had been dispatched
by 911,
he had jurisdiction.
So the two of them
had their own agenda.
Of course, our poor brother
is laying here
not knowing
what’s happening to him.
Well, I got to thinking
about others in the Bible
that have gone out
for their own agenda.
Satan obviously tops the list.
He had an agenda.
He wanted worship.
But what about Korah,
Dathan, Abiram?
Turn to Numbers
chapter 16,
verses 8 through 11,
but we’re not going to read all of that.
You remember the account.
In fact,
I think you studied it in detail.
But in verse 8:
“Moses then said to Korah:
‘Listen, please,
“‘you sons of Levi.
“‘Does it seem to you
such a little thing
“‘that the God of Israel
“‘has separated you
from the assembly of Israel
“‘and allowed you
to approach him in order to perform
“‘the service
of Jehovah’s tabernacle
and to stand
before the assembly?’”
In other words,
you’ve been given a special privilege.
Now, does that seem
like such a little thing to you?
In verse 10, he said:
“Must you also try
to secure the priesthood?”
Well, if you think about this matter
of a personal agenda,
in your assignments,
you can contribute much
to the unity
of the group you’re with,
the branch, the department.
But if you start thinking
about how this is going to give
honor and glory to you,
you could start thinking
about getting
as much responsibility
as you can
—working for your own interests
rather than
the interests of others,
getting or developing
a personal agenda.
So in addition
to the special privileges you have
in full-time service,
must you also
try to get something else?
try to get something greater?
Two others
that fell victim to this
were James and John.
Turn to the book of Mark,
and again we’re just going to glance
at a couple of the scriptures,
a couple of the verses.
Here, you remember
—and Brother Ciranko
already commented on this account
—James and John.
One account said
they got their mother to do it,
but they knew,
Jesus knew.
He answered them,
and they said: “Teacher,”
verse 35, chapter 10,
“Teacher,
we want you to do for us
whatever we ask of you.”
‘We’ve got a personal agenda.
‘We want to sit
on your right hand and your left.
‘We want to have honor;
we want to have authority.
You see, we want this.’
Well, without doing all
of the details here,
verse 41,
what did it do to the unity
of the group of the 12?
Verse 41:
“When the ten others heard about it,
“they became indignant
at James and John.”
It didn’t help
the unity of the group
with a personal agenda.
And so it is with you.
If you promote
a personal agenda,
it’s not going to help
the unity of the department
or the branch
that you’re serving with.
We might think,
in conclusion,
of an illustration
of an orchestra.
Before a performance,
all of the instruments
in an orchestra
generally adjust
to a single pitch
—one generated sometimes
by an electronic tone generator.
Now, once they have been tuned
to a single tone,
all of the instruments
are automatically
tuned to each other.
And so it is if you listen
to the one tone,
you will all
be tuned together.
You remember Jesus
in his prayer
to his Father
in John 17 before his death.
He prayed that they
would be in union,
that they
would be together as one.
If you turn to John 17:21,
he said: “So that they may all be one,”
in his prayer to his Father,
“just as you, Father, are in union with me,”
in other words,
united, one,
“. . . that they also may be
in union with us,
so that the world may believe
that you sent me.”
But now,
drop down to verse 23:
“In union with them and you—”
“I in union with them
and you in union with me,
in order that they
may be perfected into one.”
Now, notice the footnote
on “perfected into one.”
It says:
“Or ‘be completely unified.’”
So for stability in the branch,
the department,
whatever your assignment is,
unity is a must;
it has to be.
Just as you’ve done
for the past 20 weeks,
we encourage you to continue
to work together, united
—perfectly, completely united—
perfected into one.
As Gilead graduates,
make sure you do your part
to help your brothers and sisters
become perfected into one.
We thank you very much,
Brother Samuelson,
for those
very practical comments.
I know the students
are going to benefit from them.
Well, now we’re looking forward
to hearing a talk
from another of our Gilead instructors,
Brother Mark Noumair.
His theme for us today
is “See the Cause.”
Well, this is a time
of great change
for Jehovah’s people,
and you students
have seen it firsthand
by being invited to Gilead.
In fact, some of you
will receive
a change of assignment
after Gilead.
And still others
might receive a change
in their circumstances
once they get back
to their branch territory.
So change
will be a part of your life.
And although change can be good,
many find unexpected change
stressful or even unsettling.
We may find ourselves asking,
‘Why me?’
And that question
is not a sign of weak faith.
Rather, it is healthy to ask why
because when you ask
the question why,
you usually
begin to explore the cause
behind the change.
Now, a careful study
of Bible history
reveals that Jehovah God
is a Master of change.
He loves change.
In fact, when we studied
the New World Translation,
Appendix A-4,
what did we learn?
We learned
that Jehovah causes,
or sets in motion,
anything he wants to happen
in order to fulfill his purpose.
Now, we might accept
that Jehovah permits this or that
when it comes to problems
in this imperfect system of things
and, perhaps, situations
that one goes through
because of imperfection.
True.
But what about when
adjustments are made
within Jehovah’s theocratic organization?
Now what?
If we have a difficult time
adjusting to a change
because it doesn’t match
our thinking,
should we automatically conclude
that Jehovah
is simply permitting
this change?
Or is he, in fact,
causing it to happen?
Well, I want to consider
two Bible accounts with you
that are going to help
answer that question.
First one,
2 Chronicles chapter 11.
The setting is when
the ten tribes
withdrew their support
from Rehoboam.
They made
Jeroboam their king.
Rehoboam wanted
those ten tribes back,
no doubt thinking:
‘They have no right to break away.
‘Who do they think they are?
‘In fact, breaking away,
‘or splitting, the 12 tribes
‘will only create
an abrupt change
‘to a stable arrangement
which originated with God
‘since the days of Moses.
I want them back.’
This was unexpected,
unsettling for Rehoboam.
And then Jehovah God
sends his prophet Shemaiah
to Rehoboam.
Second Chronicles 11,
let’s read verse 4:
“This is what Jehovah says:
“‘You must not go up
“‘and fight
against your [Rehoboam’s] brothers.
“‘Each of you return
to his house,
“‘for I [Jehovah]
“‘have caused this
to happen.’”
‘I have caused
‘this split
to happen, Rehoboam.
‘I caused it.
‘And anything that I cause
can only have good results.
‘It’s going to be good.
I cause it;
it’s going to be good.’
And we too can discern
the possible benefits
of this split.
Think about it:
Individual Israelites
in either kingdom now
would have an opportunity
to demonstrate
if they would personally uphold
true worship
at the temple,
regardless of which king was ruling
and regardless of which territory
they lived in.
Jehovah’s patience,
his mercy,
his protection
would be magnified
as he now dealt
with two kingdoms
instead of one.
But we may wonder,
‘Since Jehovah caused this,
why did the apostasy
occur afterwards?’
Well, Jehovah intended this split
to be a mere governmental division,
an organizational adjustment,
not a departure
from true worship
as centered
at the temple in Jerusalem.
If Jeroboam
had continued faithful,
that separate kingdom of Israel
would have continued
right alongside the kingdom of Judah.
They would have worked together
to honor and praise Jehovah God.
That would have been wonderful.
Jehovah would have made sure of that.
So Jehovah didn’t cause
the apostasy.
These problems,
or human flaws,
resulted when Rehoboam
and Jeroboam failed to see
that Jehovah expected obedience
no matter where they lived.
That’s the point:
They failed to cooperate
with the new reality
and reap the benefits
from what Jehovah
was causing to happen.
So, what first lesson
do we want you to think about,
to learn,
to have etched into your memory?
When Jehovah causes a change,
it can only be for the good.
All we need to do
is cooperate with the change
and see the cause, or see
what Jehovah
is setting in motion,
and then look to him
for a blessing on the outcome.
See, this divine precedent
teaches us
that it is vital
for you, for me,
vital to distinguish
the perfect cause
of Jehovah
from the imperfect flaws
of humans
who fail to cooperate
with what Jehovah God
is doing.
That’s point number one.
Let’s go on
to our second example.
This one has to do with Joseph.
The setting is when Joseph
was in Egypt,
and he’s making himself known
to his brothers.
Genesis chapter 45,
let’s open our Bibles there.
Chapter 45, verse 7,
notice what Joseph says
to his brothers, how he words this:
“But God sent me
ahead of you,”
sent me ahead of you,
“in order to preserve for you a remnant,”
there was a purpose,
“on the earth
and to keep you alive
by a great deliverance.”
Do we see that?
Jehovah didn’t merely permit
him to go to Egypt,
but he caused Joseph
to go to Egypt.
‘I sent you;
I caused you to go ahead
to preserve a remnant.’
You see,
Joseph’s arrival in Egypt
was part
of Jehovah’s purpose
in creating the conditions
that would result
in preserving the offspring
that would lead to the Messiah.
However,
Jehovah causing a change,
at times,
the consequences
of that change
are not what we expect.
And that’s what we
have to think about.
He causes the change,
but the consequences
might not be
what we expect.
For example,
think about Joseph.
He becomes a slave.
He didn’t expect that.
He went to prison.
‘I don’t expect this.
‘I’m initially—
I’m treated severely.
I didn’t like that.’
See, Joseph suffered
many human injustices
or flaws
along the way.
He could have easily resisted,
proudly reasoned:
‘Now, hold on here.
‘Me? A slave?
A slave?
‘The prophetic dreams
I received as a young man
‘indicated that others
would bow down to me.
‘I don’t see anyone
bowing down to me.
‘I’m bowing down to others as a slave.
This doesn’t make sense.
‘This is not turning out the way
I have expected
or preferred.’
In fact,
some 13 years would pass
before Joseph
would experience relief.
The changes in his life
were unexpected,
unclear, and unsettling.
But he didn’t ask: “Jehovah,
what are you doing to me?”
Rather, he humbly asked,
“What are you doing with me?”
See, unlike proud Rehoboam
and Jeroboam,
Joseph could see the cause
—what Jehovah
was setting in motion—
not the human flaws.
He could discern
the special work
to which he
had been appointed.
Why, he even reassured
his brothers
that Jehovah had directed
and caused
his relocation to Egypt,
and it served
for the preservation
of his family
and for all families of the earth.
He got that.
And what’s the lesson
that you really need
to think about?
Our personal response
—personal response—
to what Jehovah causes
reveals a lot
about our humility
and our patience.
Our attitude, our response
can lead to a spiritual fall
or success.
Now, let’s
get specific with you.
How can you apply this?
There may be a time
when organizational adjustments
make it seem that Jehovah
has handcuffed your talents,
clipped your wings.
And maybe this adjustment
that you’re undergoing,
it just doesn’t match
your thinking.
What are you going to do then?
Now what happens?
Don’t let pride
get in the way.
If you let pride get in the way,
you could actually delay
the fruitage
of organizational decisions.
And that’s not what
you’ve been trained to do at Gilead.
It’s just the opposite.
We’ve talked for months
about how you need to get on board
with the organizational direction.
But now,
imagine if you begin to doubt
that instruction
from headquarters.
“It doesn’t really apply
to our country.
“Oh, these instructions,
they won’t work here.
“We’re different.
We do things differently.
“The brothers in New York,
they’re really not—
“They don’t understand
our circumstances.
We should apply it
in a different way.”
You see,
what have you just done?
If that type of thinking
begins to take root,
you will only hesitate
to implement
or halfheartedly support
the direction received.
And that’s not what
you’ve been trained to do.
So do you understand
how this might apply in the future?
And voicing such doubts
can only create
an unhealthy spirit
and weaken your brothers.
Instead, try to see
what Jehovah
is really causing to happen.
What is he causing to happen?
Jehovah God is training you
to better refine
such qualities as obedience
and patience and loyalty
so that you can be used
that much more
for Jehovah’s purpose,
honor, and glory.
For your spiritual health,
you want to view decisions
as from Jehovah,
causing his will to take place,
even if it is not convenient
or you don’t immediately discern
the real benefits.
There is no spiritual risk
in wholeheartedly supporting
decisions made
by Jehovah’s
spirit-directed organization.
See the cause,
not the flaws.
There are plenty of human flaws
to concentrate on.
Get away from that.
See what Jehovah
is setting in motion.
Once you see it,
help others to see it.
Like Joseph, use your words
to reassure and strengthen
your brothers.
And then do you know
what you will become part of?
What will you become a part of?
As Brother Sanderson said:
The Gilead legacy.
So stay
with that understanding.
Stay with that attitude.
Stay with that motive.
Let’s distill our discussion
down to three points:
(1)
Be careful not to assume
that Jehovah is permitting,
just permitting
an organizational adjustment,
when in reality he is far more likely
causing it to happen.
(2) When Jehovah causes a change,
it can only be for good,
and (3) don’t be quick
to see the human flaws.
It takes patience and humility
to work along with Jehovah God
as he progressively causes
his purpose to go forward.
Your maturity,
your love for Jehovah God
and his way of doing things
has been clearly manifest
while you’ve attended Gilead School,
and that’s why Jehovah God loves you.
That’s why we love you.
So maintain this spirit as you work
along with God’s unfolding purpose.
For it is this attitude
that will lead
to your spiritual success.
It is this attitude
that will help you
to continue
to see the cause.
Well, we thank you very much,
Brother Noumair,
for that excellent discourse.
Well, now you have an opportunity
to participate in the program.
If you’d like to stand,
if you’re able,
we’re going to sing
song number 84
which is entitled
“Reaching Out,”
song 84.